# FAQ/Troubleshooting

### How do I fit the bounded Brownian motion model?
The bounded Brownian motion model (Boucher & Démery 2016 Syst. Biol.) is a special case of the *FPK* model in which there are bounds on the trait values and the macroevolutionary landscape is flat. Its likelihood can be calculated using the *BBMV* package as follows:
```r
ll_BBMV0=lnL_BBMV(tree,TRAITb,Npts=50,bounds=bounds,a=0,b=0,c=0)
```
However, this implies that you know the bounds that act on trait values. Estimating them is possible using functions of the [*BBM* repository](https://github.com/fcboucher/BBM), but the optimization procedure used is less reliable than that of the *BBMV* package. Although we lack an analytical proof of it, it seems that the minimum and maximum of observed trait values at the tips of the phylogeny are the ML estimators of the bounds of the trait interval (see Boucher & Démery 2016 Syst. Biol. for details). If you don't have an a priori of which bounds to expect, you could thus use the *BBMV* package to fit the bounded Brownian motion model as follows:
```r
ll_BBMV0=lnL_BBMV(tree,TRAITb,Npts=50,bounds=c(min(TRAITb),max(TRAITb)),a=0,b=0,c=0)
```

### ML estimation
Numerical errors can occur when trying to fit the *FPK* model to empirical data. Here are a few suggestions that can help solving some issues:
- changing the optimization method used in the *find.mle_FPK* function (e.g. from *Nelder-Mead* to *L-BFGS-B*)
- changing *Npts* to an odd number, or reducing it
- changing the initial parameters used to start the optimization, especially reducing the value of the first parameter (the diffusion coefficient, log(sigsq/2)). This can be done as follows:
```r
fit4b=find.mle_FPK(model=ll_FPK4,init.optim = c(-12,0,1,-5))
```
- using three different sets of initial parameters used to start the optimization, which can be done by setting the *safe* argument to TRUE:
```r
fit4b=find.mle_FPK(model=ll_FPK4,safe=TRUE)
```

In cases where you see an error which looks like *error in solve.default ... reciprocal condition number =*, you can try decreasing the tolerance used when calling the *solve* function, which we use for inverting the diffusion matrix. This can be done by manually editing the *prep_mat_exp* function in the *utils_BBMV.r* script.

**Pay attention to the likelihoods of nested models**

When you are comparing models with different shapes of the evolutionary potential, remember to check that complex models should always have a higher likelihood than simpler models (which are nested within the complex ones). Optimization of the model is difficult, and this kind of situations unfortunately happens...

### MCMC estimation

In order to ensure that the Gibbs sampler mixes well you need to fine-tune the proposal function (the function that determines how you can move to one parameter value to another in the next step of the MCMC chain). This is done by specifying a vector of values as the *proposal_sensitivity* argument and can be quite tricky. One solution to get an idea of the values this parameter should take is to make an test MCMC run while sampling the prior only. This is rather quick since the likelihood needs not be calculated (which takes the most computing time) and can be done by setting *prior.only=F*. At least by doing that you would be able to rule out values of the proposal sensitvity that are too small for the prior to be fully explored in a reasonable number of steps of the MCMC algorithm.

### Error when fitting the BBM model: 'one-dimensional optimization by Nelder-Mead is unreliable' 

This is an automatic message generated by the base function *optim*, telling you that the default optimization routine (Nelder-Mead) is not the best one when only one parameter is optimized: in the case of the **BBM** model, only sigsq needs to be estimated. I have been ignoring this message so far, and did not see any pathological consequences: optimization is done and sigsq seems to be rather easy to estimate anyway. However, the safest option in this case would be to edit the *find.mle_FPK* function so that the you can use 'Brent' as the optimization routine (which is supposed to be the best routine for problems with only one parameter). I will try to remember to do this for the next release of the package.

### How to I fit other forms of the evolutionary potential than the ones currently allowed?

Under the *FPK* model, a continuous trait evolves according to random diffusion (Brownian motion) and is also subject to an 'evolutionary potential' that creates a force that pulls the trait towards specific regions of the trait interval. In theory, this force can be of any conceivable shape but for the present implementation we have chosen a parametric shape for the potential of the shape: *V(x)=ax<sup>4</sup>+bx<sup>2</sup>+cx*. This parametric form is really flexible, and can allow for a variety of shapes with only three parameters. 

However, you might want to try other shapes of the potential. This requires a bit of hacking but is actually not so complicated: all you need to do is to edit the *lnL_FPK* or *lnL_BBMV* function (depending on the case you are interested in). In the code of both of these function there is one line for the full model (with three parameters a, b, and c, special cases with a or b fixed are trated as well) that goes like:

```r
fun=function(X){return(-LogLik_bounds(tree_formatted=tree_formatted,dCoeff=X[1],dMat=DiffMat_backwards(X[2]*SEQ^4+X[3]*SEQ^2+X[4]*SEQ),bounds=bounds))}
```

This line actually serves to define the likelihood function. The potential *V(x)* is given through the *dMat* argument: we directly calculate the transition matrix between points on the grid from this potential. In the present form of the code, BLABLA

### What about trait-dependent diversification?

Wayne P. Maddison has showed us that trait evolution and diversification should be estimated jointly. Latter on Rich G. Fitzjohn has developped the R diversitree package to do it. The *FPK* model suffers from this issue exactly as other tait evolution models do. 

Since we use a discretization procedure to fit the likelihood of the *FPK* model, it is possinble to use the machinery of diversitrees's *MuSSE* framework to jointly estimate trait evolution and trait-dependent diversification. This is one of my plans in the mid-term, but feel free to experiment with it! 


